## Prelude to Democracy (1970s)

> There was no real talk of democracy and the focus was on the administration of the British colonial government

Hong Kong was under British colonial rule, governed by *a small group of expatriate officials in alliance with powerful business interests*. Governance was not based on popular representation but on loyalty to the Governor.

**First generation of locally born university students** who started questioning colonial rule and raising concerns about societal issues like police corruption and inadequate housing for squatters.

Forming grassroots pressure groups and nationalist, pro-China groups.

==A key success==: The colonial government under the reformist governor Murray MacLehose accepted to recognize Chinese as an official language, which the government agreed to in 1974.

^fb8f59

However, **widespread calls for democracy were not yet a central focus**. the activism was primarily aimed at administrative and social reforms.

## The Early Democracy Project (Early 1980s)

> Serious talk about democracy only began in the early 1980s

The university graduates of the 1970s had become a new middle class of service professionals (doctors, lawyers, teachers).

Negotiations for Hong Kong's return to China in 1997 began $\to$ Concerns among the burgeoning middle class about the *potential loss of freedoms, censorship, and the imposition of authoritarian rule.*

1. "Election" and "accountability" were introduced into the Sino-British Joint Declaration.
2. Formation of the first pro-democracy political groups (Meeting Point and the Hong Kong Forum)
3. Those groups accepted Chinese sovereignty but were anxious to protect Hong Kong's basic freedoms.

## Restricted Democracy (Mid-1980s to 1997)

In the mid-1980s, London, Beijing, and the Hong Kong business community converged on a model of "restricted democracy."

- Creating elected district councils and introducing "functional constituencies" to give a *semblance* of participation 提供表面上的參與 **without ceding real power.**
- Pro-democracy service professionals pushed back, proposing direct elections for 1997.

### 1989 Tiananmen Square Crackdown 天安門廣場鎮壓事件

The violent suppression of student protesters in Beijing **shattered hopes for a democratic China**. It also created **deep anxiety** in Hong Kong about its future under Chinese rule.

The event mobilized a massive outpouring of support in Hong Kong, with ==1.5 million people protesting.==

In response, pro-democracy professionals formed the United Democrats party 聯合民主黨. This group later merged with Meeting Point 「匯點」 to become the **Democratic Party** in 1994, which became **the largest party in the 1995 elections**.

---

The last British governor, Christopher Patten, pushed for expanded democratic reforms, which ==infuriated Beijing==.

In response, China strengthened its alliance with the Hong Kong business community and fostered pro-China, grassroots organizations 基層組織.  
This led to **the creation of the pro-establishment party 建制派政黨**, the Democratic Alliance for the Betterment of Hong Kong (DAB) 民主建港聯盟（民建聯）, in 1992.

By the 1997 handover, the political landscape was clearly divided into two opposing camps: the **pan-democratic** and the **pro-establishment**.
