## Question 1

### 1(a)

> [!info] Question  
> Consider the logical expressions: $(P ∧ Q) ∨ ¬P$ and $P → Q$. Prove that these expressions are equivalent using a truth table.

| P   | Q   | $P ∧ Q$ | $\neg P$ | $(P ∧ Q) ∨ ¬P$ | $P → Q$ |
| --- | --- | ------- | -------- | -------------- | ------- |
| T   | T   | T       | F        | T              | T       |
| T   | F   | F       | F        | F              | F       |
| F   | T   | F       | T        | T              | T       |
| F   | F   | F       | T        | T              | T       |

So $(P ∧ Q) ∨ ¬P \equiv  P → Q$

### 1(b)

> [!info] Question  
> Prove the equivalency of the two terms above without using a truth table.

$(P ∧ Q) ∨ ¬P$  

$\equiv (\neg P  \vee P) \land (Q \vee \neg P)$

$\equiv Q \vee \neg P$  

$\equiv P \to Q$

### 1(c)

> [!info] Question  
> Prove that the following propositional is a tautology without using a truth table:  
> $$(p → (q → r)) → ((p → q) → (p → r))$$

$$(p \to q) \to (p \to r) \equiv$$

$$
\neg (p \to q) \vee (p \to r) \equiv
$$

$$
(p \wedge \neg q) \vee \neg p \vee r \equiv
$$

$$
((\neg p \vee p) \wedge (\neg p \wedge \neg q)) \vee r \equiv
$$

$$
\neg p \wedge \neg q \vee r \equiv
$$

$$
p \to (q \to r)
$$

So, $(p → (q → r)) → ((p → q) → (p → r))$ is always true and it's a tautology.

### 1(d)

> [!info] Question  
> Let $p, q, r, s$ denote four propositions. You are given the following set of premises:
> 1. $p → (s ∨ r)$
> 2. $¬s → p$
> 3. $(r → q) → (r → ¬q)$
> 4. $¬s$  
> Using rules of inference for propositional logic, show that the truth of the above premises implies that the conclusion $(p ∧ ¬q)$ is true.

5. $p$ (4,2 modus ponens)
6. $s \vee r$ (5,1 modus ponens)
7. $r$ (6,4 disjunctive syllogism)
8. $r \to \neg q$ (3 equalvent)
9. $\neg q$ (7,8 modus ponens)
10. $p \vee \neg q$ (5,9 conjunction)

### 1(e)

> [!info] Question  
> Let the domain consist of all people in a pub and P(x) denote the statement that x is drinking. Briefly argue whether this statement is always true or not.  
> $$∃x (P(x) → ∀y P(y))$$  
> The statement means there is someone in the pub such that, if he or she is drinking, then everyone in the pub is drinking.

**Case 1**:

There exist a person who is not drinking, or no one is drinking:

$$\forall y P(y) = \text{False}$$

There exist person in the pub is not drinking, then $P(x)$ is False.

$$P(x) \rightarrow \forall y P(y) \equiv \text{False} \Rightarrow \text{False}$$  
**Case 2**:

All people are drinking, $\forall y P(y) = \text{True}$

There exist person in the pub is drinking, then $P(x)$ is True.

$$P(x) \rightarrow \forall y P(y) \equiv \text{True} \Rightarrow \text{True}$$

Therefore, the statement is always true.

### 1(f)

> [!info] Question  
> Negate the statement in (e) so that all negation symbols immediately precede predicates.

$\neg \exists x (P(x) \rightarrow \forall y P(y))$

$\equiv \forall x \neg (P(x) \rightarrow \forall y P(y))$

$\equiv \forall x (P(x) \wedge \neg \forall y P(y))$

$\equiv \forall x (P(x) \wedge \exists y \neg P(y))$

### 1(g)

> [!info] Question  
> Assume div(a, b) is a predicate that means b is divisible by a and the domain is all positive integers. Write the following statements by using only quantifiers and predicate div.\

#### 1(g)(i)

> [!info] Question  
> x is a prime number. Denote this predicate as prime(x).  
> You are allowed to use this predicate in part (ii).  

Prime number is greater than 1, and it has no other divisors other than the number itself and number 1.

$$prime(x) = (x > 1) \land ∀y(div(y, x) → (y = 1 ∨ y = x))$$

#### 1(g)(ii)

> [!info] Question  
> There are infinitely many primes.  
> (Hint: Look at this statement from a different perspective: for every prime number, there exists a bigger prime number)

For the domain, we still need to check whether the domain has prime number or not.

$$∃x(prime(x)) ∧ ∀x(prime(x) \to \exists y((y > x) \land prime(y)))$$

#### 1(g)(iii)

> [!info] Question  
> Imagine you want to write that there exists only finitely many primes. How can you this statement? (We know that this is a wrong statement, we only want to learn how to show there exists finitely many of something.)

$$
\exists x\forall y(prime(y) \to (x \geq y))
$$

## Question 2

> [!info] Question  
> Assume that you are a CPEG student and you are hired as an intern by Arman for his hardware company that only utilises NOR ($\overline{\vee}$) gates for logic operations. NOR gate is implemented as $p \overline{\vee} q = \neg(p \vee q)$. Recall that the OR gate for inputs $p, q$ is calculated as $p \vee q$. NOT gate of $p$ is calculated as $\neg p$ and the AND gate of inputs $p, q$ is calculated as $p \wedge q$.

### 2(a)

> [!info] Question  
> At the onboarding training, your boss Arman said that NOR gate is a universal gate and it is possible to create AND, OR, and NOT gates by solely using NOR gates. Please use what you have learned in COMP2711 to prove it by providing the equivalent representations of AND, OR, and NOT gates using only NOR gates.

$$\text{NOT} \equiv \neg p \equiv \neg(p \vee p) \equiv p \bar{\vee} p$$

$$
\text{AND}\equiv p\wedge q\equiv\neg(\neg p\vee\neg q)
$$

$$\equiv\neg p \bar{\vee} \neg q$$

$$\equiv (p \bar{\vee} \bar{p}) \bar{\vee}(q \bar{\vee} \bar{q})$$

$$\text{OR} \equiv p \vee q \equiv \neg(p \bar{\vee} q)$$

$$\equiv(p\bar{\vee} q)\bar{\vee}(p\bar{\vee} q)$$

### 2(b)

> [!info] Question  
> Because of your excellent performance during training, Arman assigns you a real project. In this project, you need to design the logical expression $\neg((q \vee r) \rightarrow p)$ using only NOR ($\overline{\vee}$) gates. What will be the equivalent expression?

$\equiv \neg (\neg (\neg q \vee r) \vee p)$

$\equiv \neg (q \vee r) \bar{\vee} p$

$\equiv (q \bar{\vee} r) \bar{\vee} p$

## Question 3

> [!info] Question  
> Assume $Even$ corresponds to the set of even integers bigger than $1$ and $Odd$ corresponds to the set of odd integers bigger or equal than $1$.  Assume $P(n)$ is a predicate about integers $n \geq 1$ such that:  
> $$\forall n \ (n \in Even \to (P(n) \to P(n + 2))).$$  
> Out of the following statements, which ones are always TRUE (denote by $T$), which ones are always FALSE (denote by $F$) and which ones can be true for some values and false for some other values (denote them by $C$). Briefly Explain why.

### 3(a)

> [!info] Question  
> $$\forall n \ (n \geq 1 \to P(n))$$

This statement assumes that $P(n)$ is true for all $n \geq 1$, but $P(n)$ is not necessarily true for given condition. So the whole statement is $C$.

### 3(b)

> [!info] Question  
> $$ P(1) \to \exists n \ (n \geq 1 \wedge P(n + 2))$$

This statement assumes that the if $P(1)$ is true, then there exists an integer $n$ greater than 1 such that $P(n+2)$ is also true.

It depends on the truth value of $P(1)$.

So the statement is $C$.

### 3(c)

> [!info] Question  
> $$P(2) \to \exists n \ (n \geq 1 \wedge P(n + 2))$$

This statement assumes that the if $P(2)$ is true, then there exists an integer $n$ greater than 1 such that $P(n+2)$ is also true.

This is $T$, since it implies if $P(2)$ is true, then $P(4)$ is also true.

The statement is $T$

### 3(d)

> [!info] Question  
> $$ P(2) \wedge \forall n \ (n > 1 \to \neg P(2n))$$

This statement asserts that $P(2)$ is true and for all x > 1, $P(2n)$ is not true.

If $P(2)$ is true, then $P(4)$ is also true, $True \land False$ is False, then the statement is $F$.

## Question 4

> [!info] Question  
> Either prove that the two statements below are logically equivalent or give a counterexample to show that they are not logically equivalent.  
> $∀x[∃yP(x, y) → False] ≡ ∀x∃y[P(x, y) → False]$

Interpret $P(x,y)$ as "x is equal to y".

- Statement 1: $∀x[∃yP(x, y) → False]$
	- The statement is For every $x$, if there exist a $y$ such that $x=y$, then we have a contradiction (False).
	- We check the statement, for $x=a$, there exists a $y$ $(y=a)$ such that $x=y$, then $∃yP(x, y)$ is true. Meaning that the entire statement is false.
	- For x=b, the statement $∃yP(x, y)$ is also true.
	- So, for all x, $∀x[∃yP(x, y) → False]$ is **false** overall.
- Statement 2: $∀x∃y[P(x, y) → False]$
	- The statement means that For every $x$, there exists a $y$ such that $x=y$, then we have a contradiction.
	- We check the statement, for x = a, we can choose y = b ($a \ne b$), then $P(x, y)$ is false, then $P(x, y) → False$ is true.
	- Similarly, for x=b, we can choose y=a and the statement holds.
	- Since the statement holds for all x in our domain, it's **true** overall.

Conclusion: $∀x[∃yP(x, y) → False]$ and $∀x∃y[P(x, y) → False]$ are not logically equivalent.

## Question 5

> [!info] Question  
> Assume $x$ is integer. Use proof by contrapositive to show if $y = x^2 − 6x + 5$ is even then x is odd.

To assume $x$ is even.  
Then $x=2k$ for some integers k.  
It follows that  $y = (2k)^2 - 6(2k) + 5$  
$= 4k^2-12k + 5$  
$= (4k^2 - 12k) + 5$  
Therefore $y = x^2-6x+5$ is odd if $x$ is even.  
This is to say, $y = x^2-6x+5$ is even, and thus $x$ is odd.
