## Question 1

Two computers, a sender and a receiver, are communicating with each other. The sender transmits bit $1$ with a probability of $30\%$ and bit $0$ with a probability of $70\%$. The communication channel is noisy, and we know the following information about the transition of data:

1. If the sent bit is $0$, there is a $90\%$ probability that the receiver will receive bit $0$ and a $10\%$ probability that it will receive bit $1$.
2. If the sent bit is $1$, there is an $80\%$ probability that the receiver will receive bit $1$ and a $20\%$ probability that it will receive bit $0$.

Given that the receiver computer received bit $0$, determine the probability that the bit being sent was also $0$.

---

By using Bayes Theorem:

$$
P(A|B) = \frac{P(B|A) P(A)}{P(B)}
$$

Our probability is $P(\text{Bit sent is 0} | \text{Bit received is 0})$.

$$
P(\text{Bit sent is 0} | \text{Bit received is 0}) = \frac{P(\text{Bit received is 0}|\text{Bit sent is 0}) P(\text{Bit sent is 0})}{P(\text{Bit received is 0})}
$$

Let $S$ be bit sent, $R$ be bit received.

$$P(\text{S = 0}) = 0.7$$

By using law of total probability:

$$P(\text{R = 0})=P(\text{R = 0 | S = 0})P(\text{S = 0}) + P(\text{R = 0 | S = 1})P(\text{S = 1})=0.9\cdot 0.7 + 0.2 \cdot 0.3 = 0.69$$

$$P(\text{R = 0}|\text{S = 0}) = 0.9$$

$$P(\text{Bit sent is 0} | \text{Bit received is 0}) = \frac{0.9 \times 0.7}{0.69} = \frac{0.63}{0.69}$$

## Question 2

Consider $5$ blue balls, $5$ green balls and $5$ red balls. We place them in a row at random. What is the probability that no blue balls are next to each other? Your answer should not contain summation.

---

We have in total ways of place all balls with different color, assume we place red balls first, we have ${15 \choose 5}$ ways, then we place the green balls, we have ${10 \choose 5}$ ways. Finally, we have blue balls, we have ${5 \choose 5}$ ways. So, we have:

$$
|S| = {15 \choose 5} {10 \choose 5} {5 \choose 5}
$$

We first place the red and green ball first, we 10 available seats of 15 seats in row, so we have ${10 \choose 5} {5 \choose 5}={10 \choose 5}$ ways.

```text
_ R _ G _ R _ G _ R _ G _ R _ G _ R _ G _
```

In order to place blue balls which are next to each other. We have ${11 \choose 5}$ ways to place the blue balls.

Therefore, we have ${10 \choose 5} {11 \choose 5}$ ways to place 3 colored balls where no blue balls are next to each other.

$$P(E) = \frac{|E|}{|S|} = \frac{{10 \choose 5} {11 \choose 5}}{{15 \choose 5} {10 \choose 5} {5 \choose 5}} = \frac{{11 \choose 5}}{{15 \choose 5}}$$

## Question 3

Let $X$ be a random variable taking values from $N$ with the following probability mass function:

$$p(X = k) = \begin{cases} 0.1 & \text{if } k = 1 \\ 0.2 & \text{if } k = 2 \\ 0.3 & \text{if } k = 3 \\ 0.4 & \text{if } k = 4 \\ 0 & \text{otherwise} \end{cases}$$

> [!Question] Part A  
> Calculate $E(X)$ and $V(X)$.

$$
E(X) = 0.1 \times 1 + 0.2 \times 2 + 0.3 \times 3 + 0.4 \times 4 = 3
$$

$$
V(X) = E(X^2) - E(X)^2
$$

$$E(X^2) = 0.1 \times 1 + 0.2 \times 2^2 + 0.3 \times 3^3 + 0.4 \times 4^2 = 10
$$

$$
V(X) = 10 - 3^2 = 1
$$

> [!Question] Part B  
> If $Y = 2X − 1$, calculate $E(Y)$ and $V (Y)$.

$$E(Y) = E(2X - 1) = 2E(X) - 1 = 2 \times 3 - 1 = 5$$
$$
V(Y) = V(2X - 1) = 2^2 V(X) = 4 \times 1 = 4
$$

> [!Question] Part C  
> Prove that $E(X) = \sum_{k=1}^{\infty} p(X \ge k)$. Argue whether this equation holds for any random variable taking values from $\mathbb{N}$ with arbitrary probability mass function?

For expected value of $X$, we have write it as $E(X) = \sum_{k=1}^{\infty} k p(X = k)$

For right hand side, consider the $\sum_{k=1}^{\infty} p(X \ge k)$:

$$p(X \geq 1) + p(X \geq 2) + p(X \geq 3) + \dots$$

$$
[p(1) + p(2) + p(3) + \dots ] + [p(2) + p(3) + p(4) + \dots] + [p(3) + p(4) + p(5) + \dots] + \dots
$$

We can observe that $p(1)$ appears once, $p(2)$ appears twice, $p(3)$ appears third times, and so on.

We have arrange it like this:

$$
1 \times p(1) + 2 \times p(2) + 3 \times p(3) + \dots = \sum_{k=1}^{\infty} k p(X = k)
$$

So, we have $E(X) = \sum_{k=1}^{\infty} p(X \ge k)$.

This equation holds for any random variable taking values from $\mathbb{N}$ with arbitrary probability mass function. Since it only use the definition of expectation and random variables only takes the non-negative integer values. This argument is also valid even some possibilities are zero.

## Question 4

Consider rolling three fair dice and let $D_1$, $D_2$, and $D_3$ be the results respectively. Define $X = \min \{ D_1, D_2, D_3 \}$. In other words, $X$ is the minimum of $D_1$, $D_2$, and $D_3$.

Answers with summation are accepted.

> [!question] Part A  
> Calculate $P(X > k)$. Note that $k \in \{ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 \}$.

To find out $P(X > k)$, the minimum of three fair dice rolls is greater than $k$. It means that all 3 rolls are greater than $k$. However, dice rolls are independent, so we have:

$P(X > k) = P(D_1 > k \text{ and } D_2 > k \text{ and } D_3 > k) = P(D_1 > k)P(D_2 > k)P(D_3 > k)$

For a single die, $P(D_i > k) = \frac{6-k}{6}$ for $k \in {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}$. If $k=6$, $P(D_i > 6) = 0$.

So, for $k \in {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}$:

$P(X > k) = \left(\frac{6-k}{6} \right)^3$

For $k = 6$, $P(X = 6) = 0$

The final answer is $\left(\frac{6-k}{6} \right)^3$

> [!question] Part B  
> Calculate $P(X = k)$. Note that $k \in \{ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 \}$.

We can calculate $P(X=k)$ using the result from Part A.

We know that $P(X > k-1) = P(X=k) + P(X > k)$.  
Therefore, $P(X=k) = P(X > k-1) - P(X > k)$.

For $k \in {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}$:  
$P(X=k) = \left(\frac{6-(k-1)}{6} \right)^3 - \left(\frac{6-k}{6} \right)^3 = \left(\frac{7-k}{6} \right)^3 - \left(\frac{6-k}{6} \right)^3$

For $k=6$:  
$P(X=6) = P(X>5) - P(X>6) = \left(\frac{6-5}{6}\right)^3 - 0 = \left(\frac{1}{6}\right)^3 = \frac{1}{216}$.

So, for $k \in {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}$:

$P(X=k) = \frac{(7-k)^3 - (6-k)^3}{6^3}$

And for $k=6$:

$P(X=6) = \frac{1}{216}$

Final Answer: The final answer is $\frac{(7-k)^3 - (6-k)^3}{216}$

> [!question] Part C  
> What is $E(X)$?

$$E(X) = \sum_{k=1}^{6} k P(X = k) = \sum_{k=1}^{6} k \frac{(7-k)^3 - (6-k)^3}{216}$$

> [!question] Part D  
> What is $V(X)$?

$$V(X) = E(X^2) - E(X)^2$$  
$$V(X) = \sum_{k=1}^{6} k^2 \frac{(7-k)^3 - (6-k)^3}{216} - \left(\sum_{k=1}^{6} k \frac{(7-k)^3 - (6-k)^3}{216} \right)^2$$

## Question 5

The CSE Department of HKUST has a total of $n$ light bulbs and $m$ switches. We know that each light bulb is connected to at least one switch. By flipping a switch, the status of every light bulb connected to it will change (so if it was OFF it will be turned ON and vice versa).  Assume $X_i$ is the random variable that shows the status of the $i^{th}$ light bulb. $X_i = 0$ means the $i^{th}$ light bulb is OFF and $X_i = 1$ means it is ON. Also, let $Y$ be the random variable that denotes the number of light bulbs that are ON in the department, i.e., $Y = \sum X_i$. Note that the initial status of every light bulb is arbitrary.

> [!question] Part A  
> Imagine you flip every switch with 50% probability. What is the expected value of $X_i$, where $i = 1, 2, \dots, n$? Briefly explain why.

Every light bulb is connected to at least one switch, and some might be connected to more than one. Since switches can only be `ON` or `OFF`, we can categorize light bulbs by whether they're connected to an odd or even number of switches.

If a bulb is connected to an odd number of switches, the bulb is turned into another status, e.g. `ON -> OFF`, `OFF -> ON`, `ON -> OFF -> ON -> OFF`, `OFF -> ON -> OFF -> ON`.

Conversely, a bulb is connected to an even number of switches, the bulb remains it's original status, e.g. `ON -> OFF -> ON`, `OFF -> ON -> OFF`, `ON -> OFF -> ON -> OFF -> ON`, `OFF -> ON -> OFF -> ON -> OFF`.

Due to the independence of switch flips and the $50\%$ probability for each flip, regardless of the initial state of the bulb and the number of connected switches, the probability of the bulb ending up ON is exactly $\frac{1}{2}$.

$$E(X_{i}) = 0 \times P(X_{i} = 0) + 1 \times P(X_{i} = 1) = \frac{1}{2}$$

> [!question] Part B  
> What is the expected value of $Y$? Briefly explain why.

The random variable $Y$ denotes the total number of bulbs that are ON. We know that there are $n$ light bulbs and each bulb has an expected value of $0.5$ for being `ON`.

So we can simply sum them up by adding $n$ times of $E(X_{i} =1) = \frac{1}{2}$

$E(Y) = E\left(\sum_{i = 1}^n X_i \right) = \sum_{i = 1}^n E(X_i) = n \cdot \frac{1}{2} = \frac{n}{2}$

> [!question] Part C  
> Assume $K$ is a random variable. Why is it not possible that $K < E(K)$ for all possible values of $K$? In other words, explain why there must be some values for $K$ such that $K \ge E(K)$.  

The expected value $E(K)$ is a weighted average value of all possible values of random variable $K$ can take.

If $K < E(K)$ for all values, it means that the average must be larger than any possible actual value of $K$, this is a contradictory. Some values must be greater than or equal to the weighted value to "balance out" the values that are less than the average.

Here is an example: If you have numbers $2$, $4$, $5$, $6$ and $8$, their average is $5$, some numbers $(2,4)$ must be smaller than $5$, some numbers $(5, 6, 8)$ must be equal or greater than the average.

In any distributions, there must be outcomes larger than, smaller than or equal to the the expected value, in order to show possible outcomes, so there exists some $K$ larger than or equal to $E(K)$.

> [!question] Part D  
> Recall the CSE Department with its light bulbs and switches again. Prove that it is possible to have at least half of the light bulbs being turned ON.  
> **(Hint:** You might want to use some facts from the previous parts. You are also allowed to use the fact in part (c) even if you could not explain it)

We know that the expected value of ON light bulbs is $\frac{n}{2}$.

From (c), we know that there are situation that OFF light bulbs are more than ON bulbs, and situation that ON bulbs are more than OFF bulbs.

Therefore, the random variable $Y$ can be larger or equal to $\frac{n}{2}$, which means that there at least half of the light bulbs being turned ON.
